Eligibility for Ad Hominem promotion | Review of ad hominem promotions process | Ad Hominem promotions: Faculty procedures  Eligibility for Ad Hominem promotion  1. Eligibility for Ad Hominem promotion   1.1. If a staff member is on university conditions of service (PE), he/she must have been confirmed in his/her appointment before applying for promotion. Should a staff member on probation be clearly performing very well, at any point, a Head of Department may make a case for early confirmation of appointment. This must have the support of the Dean and the Deputy Vice-Chancellor responsible for academic matters. The proposal must be based on achievements of SASP (Standard Academic Salary Package) criteria obtained after the appointment of the staff member. 1.2. Joint staff on Western Cape Government conditions of service If a person is on the conditions of service of a health authority, on a joint Western Cape Government establishment (in addition to 1.1.), he/she must:   be on the permanent staff if a South African citizen be held against a permanent post if not a South African citizen.     2. Committee structures and guidelines   2.1. Faculty Promotion and Remuneration Committee Each faculty appoints a committee to consider ad hominem promotion and above SASP awards. Membership: Dean, DVC, two outside Deans, and other members as determined by the faculty board.  The committee   makes recommendations on ad hominem promotions to the Vice-Chancellor makes recommendations on above SASP to the DVC: academic matters for approval by the meeting of the Deans.   The committee may lay down the procedures to be followed within the faculty. Faculty specific criteria for ad hominem promotion are applied.  The structure, function and powers of this committee and any sub-committee must be approved by the faculty board. No applications may be suppressed by sub-committees (i.e. the final committee must consider all applications).  Recommendation for ad hominem promotions requires a two thirds majority vote. Should two of the Deputy Vice-Chancellors and the two cognate Deans oppose a recommendation, the recommendation must be referred to the committee of the Deans for a final decision, even if it receives two-thirds support from the faculty committee as a whole.  Recommendations to the Vice-Chancellor on ad hominem promotions must   contain copies of the candidate's curricula vitae and the names and addresses of the referees consulted, and, in the case of a Professor contain the committee's assessment that it is satisfied as to the international standing of the candidate's scholarship.   Faculty promotion and remuneration committees must arrange for feedback to be given to successful and unsuccessful candidates, and to the relevant HODs. An unsuccessful candidate should be informed as to why his/her application was not successful.  2.2. Committee of the Deans Membership: the DVC responsible for academic matters (Chair) and the Deans.  The purpose of this committee is to ensure co-ordination and consistency between faculty criteria and procedures and to review the ad hominem promotions process.  The committee further decides on recommendations where two out of the Deputy Vice-Chancellor and the two cognate Deans oppose a recommendation at faculty level.    See also: Review of ad hominem promotions process  Ad Hominem promotions: Faculty procedures  CHED (2018) CHED ad hominem 2018 (including invitation, timetable, application form, guidelines, HR174 and HR175 forms)  Commerce and GSB (2019) Commerce invitation for ad hominem promotion, merit and excellence awards 2019 Commerce guidelines for performance evaluation of academic staff (excluding the College of Accounting) 2019 College of Accounting guidelines for performance evaluation of academic staff 2019 Commerce guidelines for performance evaluation of research staff 2019 Commerce timelines for ad hominem promotions and awards 2019  GSB invitation for ad hominem promotion, merit and excellence awards 2018 GSB Timelines for ad hominem promotions 2018  EBE (2018) EBE ad hominem invitation and guidelines 2018 (including invitation, guidelines, summary information sheet, links to HR174 and HR175 forms)  Health Sciences (2018) Health Sciences ad hominem invitation 2018 Health Sciences guidelines and performance criteria for ad hominem promotion for academic staff 2018 Health Sciences guidelines and performance criteria for ad hominem promotion for research staff 2018 Health Sciences guidelines and performance criteria for academic ranking for clinical educators 2018 Health Sciences merit and excellence awards criteria 2018  Humanities (2018) Humanities ad hominem invitation 2018 Humanities ad hominem timeline 2018 Humanities ad hominem procedures and guidelines 2018 Humanities ad hominem teaching and supervision profile 2018 Humanities ad hominem document requirements 2018 Humanities ad hominem application form 2018  Law (2018) Law ad hominem invitation and guidelines 2018 (including guidelines, invitation, timelines and application form)  Science (2019) Science ad hominem promotion cover letter 2019 Science ad hominem promotion procedures 2019 Science ad hominem performance descriptions (points system) 2019 Science ad hominem promotion portfolio guidelines 2019 Science ad hominem promotion summary sheet 2019  Page last updated 13 May 2019    Share on