Introduction | Related policies | Requests for recruitment advertising | Internal advertising | Required recruitment advertising documentation | Advertising costs | Media placement | Advertising deadlines | Cancellation of advertising requests | Non-recruitment advertising  Introduction  It is UCT policy that any advertisement which appears in the media under the heading of the "University of Cape Town" must appear in the UCT layout and house style approved by Council. Advertisements for vacant positions should be placed by the Recruitment Advertising Office to ensure all advertisements are standardised and in compliance with Council's requirement.  All recruitment advertising requests are to be forwarded to:  Sithini Ngozi Recruitment Advertising Officer Staff Recruitment Office Human Resources, Room 214, Bremner Building, Lower Campus, Rondebosch Tel: + 27 21 650 2220 Email: advertising@uct.ac.za  Related policies  The recruitment advertising procedures should be read in conjunction with the following:   Vacancy categories Recruitment policies and procedures Fixed-term employment contracts policy   1. Requests for recruitment advertising  All requests for recruitment advertising are routed by the relevant HR Practitioner/Recruitment Advisor where applicable.  See the following categories:     LEVELS APPOINTMENT TYPES CO-ORDINATED BY   ACADEMIC (All levels)   Permanent Fixed-term appointments of more than 2 years   The staff recruitment office   PASS (PC 9 &amp; above)   Permanent Fixed-term appointments of more than 2 years   The staff recruitment office   PASS (PC 1 - 8)   Permanent Fixed-term appointments of less than 2 years   The relevant HR Practitioner who forwards the request to the recruitment advertising office   ALL OTHER POSTS   Fixed-term appointments of less than 2 years   The relevant HR Practitioner who forwards the request to the recruitment advertising office     2. Internal advertising  If a position is open to UCT permanent and temporary staff only and is to be advertised on the internal vacancies web page, the following sentence "Please note that only applications from suitably qualified members of the permanent and temporary UCT staff will be considered" should be used in the advertisement.  3. Required recruitment advertising documentation   The advertising request form (HR200) The full advertisement for the UCT website The position description (if available &amp; where applicable)   Please note: The advertisement template is available on request and a delay in advertising will result if the HR200 form is not submitted.  Disclaimer: Advertisements forwarded to the Recruitment Advertising Office will be considered as the approved final version and 100% correct and will not be liable/responsible for any errors.  4. Advertising costs  The central advertising budget will cover the costs of advertising for all vacancy categories which are funded from the University's general operating budget (GOB).   Positions will be advertised every two weeks in a composite advertisement in the print media, with a web link to the UCT vacancies web page. Any advertising requests over and above the composite advertising will be for the account of the relevant faculty/department/research unit. Any non-GOB (research/externally/donor-funded) vacancies will be advertised at a cost to the relevant faculty/department/research unit. Only journal websites will be used and any requests for advertising in print journals will be for the account of the faculty/department/research unit. There is a production fee for print advertising. The production fee is determined by the size of the advertisement.   5. Media placement   UCT website - all positions PASS POSITIONS  Payclass 1 - 8 (GOB and non-GOB) are advertised on the UCT web only. Any requests for print media advertising will be at a cost to the relevant faculty/department/research unit. Payclasses 9 and above will appear in a composite advertisement (displayed with the UCT logo) as approved by Council.   ACADEMIC POSITIONS  will appear in a composite advertisement (displayed with the UCT logo) as approved by Council.     6. Advertising deadlines     Media Advert submitted to Recruitment Advertising Officer by HR Practitioner   UCT website (internal and general vacancies) Submission to the Recruitment Advertising Officer is two business days prior to placement on the website.   National Newspapers Deadline by 10h00 every alternate Friday   Western Cape (including Community Newspapers) Deadline by 10h00 every alternate Friday   Websites (excluding UCT) Deadline by 10h00 every alternate Friday   Please note:  A list of recommended media is available on request.  Public holidays - When a publication deadline falls on a public holiday, the final approval date will be 2 working days prior.     7. Cancellation of advertising requests   The Recruitment Advertising Officer is to be advised via email if a department no longer wishes to advertise a vacancy in the print media or on the requested websites. If advertising space has been booked with the relevant media and the advertisement is cancelled, the department shall be liable for a cancellation fee.    8. Non-recruitment advertising   Classes and courses, notices of lecturer/meetings, and general notices  Advertisements for the above should be forwarded to the Marketing Officer, Communication &amp; Marketing Department who will liaise directly with the originator of the advertisement with regard to publication deadlines, editing and payment.  Contact: Brighton Akani Khoza Tel: 021 650 5816 Email: brighton.khoza@uct.ac.za Web: Communication and Marketing Department  Postdoctoral fellowships All advertisements for Postdoctoral Fellowships are to be forwarded to the Director, Postgraduate Funding Office for approval.  Contact: Chantel Reed Tel: 021 650 2205 Email: chantel.reed@uct.ac.za Web: Postdoctoral research fellowships  Other fellowships The Deputy Vice-Chancellor for Research has indicated that awards and salaried posts must be advertised separately. Therefore, should a fellowship be a salaried position it can be advertised on the UCT vacancies web page and should be forwarded to the Recruitment Advertising Officer via the relevant HR Practitioner.    Page last updated: 11 December 2018    Share on