Recruitment and selection policy  Unless this document provides to the contrary, UCT's standard policies and procedures for staff recruitment and selection will apply.  Procedures  The procedures below are to be followed when appointing Wardens and Assistant Wardens:    When a vacancy occurs, a request is sent to the Executive Director, Department of Student Affairs, via the Director: Student Housing &amp; Residence Life for approval to fill the vacancy.   The Director: Student Housing &amp; Residence Life (in the case of a Warden position) or the Manager: Residence Life (in the case of an Assistant Warden position) and the Chair of the College of Wardens approves the composition of a selection committee, which consists of:   Director: SH &amp; RL (Warden position) Manager: Residence Life (Assistant Warden position) Warden of the residence (Assistant Warden position) College of Wardens representative 3 student representatives (Subwarden, Head student, house committee member) Residence Facilities Officer or nominee EE Representative HR Practitioner    The selection process is managed by the Staff Recruitment Office. This office keeps all applications on file, arranges all meetings, and keeps all members of the selection committee informed.   Once a selection committee is approved, a search meeting is convened and the position is advertised.   Members of the selection committee are provided access to the applications (which are strictly confidential to the committee) by the Staff Recruitment Office. The applicants are graded in a preliminary manner by the grading sub-committee, which would include the EE representative and students. Members of the selection committee are expected to scrutinise all the applications, and make any recommendations to the grading sub-committee.   The selection committee meets to decide on a short-list of candidates. Referees' reports are then requested.   The shortlisted candidates are then invited to interact with a representative group of house members, selected by the House Committee. The Warden of the house or the College of Wardens representative is present at this meeting in an oversight capacity.   The selection committee meets to interview the short-listed candidates. It takes into account the applicants' background and work experience as reflected in their curricula vitae, the referees' reports, the selection committee interviews and the report from the sub-committee on the house meeting and security checks if so requested by the committee, before making a recommendation.   The delegated authority for the appointment is the Executive Director, Department of Student Affairs.    Approved by Mr Grant Willis 11 July 2012  Page last updated: 18 March 2013    Share on