Recognition and procedural agreement between the University and the UCT Employees Union   The University has entered into a recognition and procedural agreement with the UCT Employees Union whereby the University recognises the association as the collective bargaining agent in those payclasses where it has majority membership. (The full text of the agreement is available from the employee relations section, Human Resources Department.) Representation by the UCT Employees Union comprises the right to negotiate and conclude agreements on behalf of its members on issues such as salary, conditions of service and various procedures. The University accepts that the Employees Union may represent any of its members in respect of discipline and grievances, whether or not such a member is employed in the recognised bargaining unit. UCT Employees Union members are entitled to elect representatives in terms of the Union's constitution.  Union members are permitted up to 30 minutes per year during working hours to elect representatives for affiliated associations, and one hour per year during working hours to attend the annual general meeting of the union. Representatives are permitted five working days special leave per annum (to a collective maximum of 110 days) for training purposes, subject to the needs of the department in which they are employed and the approval of the Executive Director, Human Resources. Representatives are permitted to attend to their duties as representatives during working hours, within reason. For example, in attendance to matters relating to the disciplinary and grievance procedures. Representatives are permitted two hours per month to prepare for union executive monthly meetings (referred to in 5 below). A union representative is allowed one working day per week on general association business, provided that no one representative is selected for more than two days per month.   Monthly consultative meetings are held between (no more than ten) management representatives and a committee of (no more than ten) union representatives. The University and the union have agreed that the resolution of disputes be through negotiation and dialogue, in terms of the following procedures.  A declaration of dispute by the aggrieved party will set out the nature of the dispute and the proposed solution. Within five days of receipt of the declaration of dispute, the parties shall convene a meeting of the negotiatory committee in an attempt to resolve the dispute. Should the dispute remain unresolved, a mediator chosen by both parties will confer with both parties in an attempt to resolve the dispute. If mediation fails to resolve the dispute, either party may exercise its right to take such legitimate industrial action as it may deem necessary. No strike action will take place unless 50% + 1 of staff within the bargaining unit have voted, by secret ballot, in favour of a strike. The union must give the University 72 hours written notice of the commencement of industrial action.   The University allows the union the use of University facilities and reasonable access to information that is relevant to the fulfilment of the association's aims and objectives.   Page last updated: 20 June 2012    Share on