Summary table | PASS PC 1 - 6 (permanent and T2) | PASS PC 7 - 12 (permanent and T2) | Academic (permanent and T2) | T1 (PASS and academic) | University's medical aid scheme  Summary table     Payclass/level Contract type Medical aid cover Annual proof of membership Post-retirement medical aid subsidy (Not applicable to staff members appointed from 1 January 2018)   PASS PC 1 - 6 Permanent Optional Not required unless wishing to access the post-retirement medical aid subsidy Only qualify if continuously on UCT medical aid scheme OR external registered South African medical aid scheme with proof of continuous cover.  Must move back on to UCT medical aid scheme prior to retirement.   T2 Optional Not required Not applicable   PASS PC 7 - 12 Permanent Compulsory as main member or spouse/partner dependant on either UCT medical aid scheme OR external registered South African medical aid scheme. Required if not a main member on UCT medical aid scheme. Only qualify if continuously on UCT medical aid scheme OR external registered South African medical aid scheme.  Must move back on to UCT medical aid scheme prior to retirement.   T2 Compulsory as main member or spouse/partner dependant on either UCT medical aid scheme OR external registered South African medical aid scheme. Required if not a main member on UCT medical aid scheme. Not applicable   Academic Permanent Compulsory as main member on UCT medical aid scheme OR spouse/partner dependant on external registered South African medical aid scheme. Required if not a main member on UCT medical aid scheme. If not a main member on UCT medical aid scheme, must move on to UCT medical aid scheme prior to retirement.   T2 Compulsory as main member or spouse/partner dependant on either UCT medical aid scheme OR external registered South African medical aid scheme. Required if not a main member on UCT medical aid scheme. Not applicable     PASS PC 1 - 6 (permanent and T2)  PASS staff members in pay classes 1 to 6 on permanent and T2 conditions of service have the option to become main members of the University's medical aid scheme, main or spouse/partner dependant on another external registered South African medical aid scheme or choose not to have medical aid cover.  Permanent staff employed before 1 January 2018 who elect not to have medical aid cover do not qualify for a post-retirement medical aid subsidy. To qualify for the subsidy, the staff member must have proven continuous medical aid cover (either UCT medical aid scheme or an external registered South African medical aid scheme) and must move on to the UCT medical aid scheme prior to retirement.  PASS PC 7 - 12 (permanent and T2) and academic clinical  PASS staff members in pay classes 7 to 12 on permanent and T2 conditions of service are required to become members of either the University's medical aid scheme or another external registered South African medical aid scheme as either the main member or spouse/partner dependant only. Those who elect not to join the University’s medical aid scheme will be requested to provide proof of medical aid membership annually. Where external cover cannot be confirmed, the staff member will be in breach of conditions of employment and further action will be taken.  Permanent staff members employed before 1 January 2018, who qualify for a post-retirement medical aid subsidy and have external medical aid cover, must move back onto the University’s medical aid scheme before retirement in order to access the subsidy. This move may incur penalties, waiting periods and/or exclusions as determined by the University’s medical aid scheme.  Academic (permanent and T2)  Academic staff members on permanent conditions of service are required to become members of the University's medical aid scheme unless they provide proof of membership as a spouse/partner dependant on an external registered South African medical aid scheme.  Academic staff members on T2 conditions of service are required to become members of the University's medical aid scheme unless they provide proof of membership as a main member or spouse/partner dependant on an external registered South African medical aid scheme.  T1 (PASS and academic)  Staff members on T1 conditions of service do not qualify to belong to UCT's medical aid scheme, therefore any staff member changing from T2 or permanent conditions of service must transfer their medical aid membership to private capacity.  University's medical aid scheme  The current university scheme is Discovery Health, and staff may elect one of 22 options. In terms of the rules of the scheme, all contributions are paid by the employer. Staff will receive tax relief as determined by the South African Revenue Service (SARS). The cost of the medical aid premium is a deduction from the staff member's monthly salary. Where a staff member has changes to the plan selection or in his/her number of dependants during the course of the year, the medical aid premium will be adjusted accordingly.  For information on the medical aid health plans and benefits, visit our Discovery Health page.  For information on the UCT medical aid subsidy (post-retirement or death in service), visit our Medical aid subsidy page.  Page last updated: 15 June 2018    Share on