Applicable to | Definitions | Policy summary | Policy principles | Policy details | Procedure | Payment of the staff tuition rate on behalf of the staff member by the University | Application form  Applicable to  Staff, retired staff, and spouses/partners who fulfil the conditions listed in the policy and, where applicable, the children of such staff.  Definitions   Child: The natural or legally adopted child of a staff member. Financial dependence: Financial dependence is where one relies on another person's income to the extent that they would not survive on his/her own income. By definition a person in employment is not a dependent upon another. Proof of income: Original or certified copies of bank statements for the first two months of the study period.   Policy summary  Each eligible staff member qualifies for staff tuition rates for himself/herself and his/her spouse or life partner, and child(ren) if the child(ren) is/are financially dependent on the staff member. The staff tuition rate varies from 25% to 75% of the normal fee.  Policy principles   Children and spouse/partners of eligible staff qualify for a staff tuition rate. The child must be financially dependant on the staff member. Note: The University Council has determined that students who qualify for both the staff tuition rate and an entrance or faculty scholarship, will have their scholarship adjusted pro-rata to the staff tuition rate percentage. The adjustment will be processed after the staff tuition rate has been processed by the Fees Office.  The relationship as child is the dominant and necessary condition, and if this is fulfilled the further necessary condition is that the child be financially dependent on the staff member. The staff tuition rate applies for courses which are credited towards formal qualifications (such as degrees and diplomas, including the two full qualifications offered by GetSmarter) and not to short courses. The staff tuition rate also applies for staff members on an individual subsidy-earning course that gives credit towards a formal qualification. Where students are staff they qualify for a special staff tuition rate in their own right in all cases, other than those where the fee has already been reduced. Staff tuition rates for spouses/life partners and dependent children are for full time and not part time study. UCT has a reciprocal agreement with the University of the Western Cape only. The staff tuition rates are applicable only while the listed conditions outlined below apply.   Should these conditions cease to exist during a year, the person/staff member must inform the Human Resources Department who will assess the position; if the rate no longer applies it will fall away and the pro-rata full fee will be payable.  Policy details  Staff tuition rates apply where the following conditions are met.     1. Full-time UCT staff member   Category of staff Self Dependant on a full-time course Rate (% of full fee charged)   spouse/ partner children   Permanent staff yes yes yes 25%   Staff on fixed term contracts who have completed two or more years of continuous service yes yes yes 25%   Staff on fixed term contracts of one year or more but have not completed two years continuous service yes no no 25%   2. Part-time UCT staff members   Category of staff Self Dependant on a full-time course Rate (% of full fee charged)   spouse/ partner children   Permanent part-time staff working at least 20 hours each week yes yes yes 60%   Permanent part-time staff working at least 20 hours each week who were previously permanent full-time staff for an uninterrupted period of 10 years yes yes yes 25%   Staff on fixed term contracts who have completed two or more years continuous service, and who work at least 20 hours each week yes yes yes 60%   3. Full-time and part-time joint/ tripartite medical staff members not on UCT conditions of service (i.e. UCT/WCG and UCT/NHLS)   Category of staff Self Dependant on a full-time course Rate (% of full fee charged)   spouse/ partner children   Permanent full-time joint staff yes yes yes 25%   Full-time joint staff on fixed term contracts of one year or more but have not completed two years of continuous service, excluding all MMed and MPhil (for sub-speciality training) degrees as the staff tuition rate has already been applied to the fee. yes no no 25%   Full time joint staff on fixed term contracts who have completed two or more years of continuous service (excluding those studying for MMed degrees as the staff tuition rate has already been applied to the fee). yes yes yes 25%   Part-time joint staff who teach at least five sessions per week and have completed three or more years of continuous service yes yes yes 75%   Honorary clinical specialists in satellite hospitals (medical specialists supervising medical registrars) yes yes yes 75%   4. Full-time non-University staff   Category of staff Self Dependant on a full-time course Rate (% of full fee charged)   spouse/ partner children   Permanent staff of state sponsored research organisations such as Atomic Energy Board (AEB), Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), National Research Foundation (NRF), Human Sciences Research Foundation (HSRC), Centre for Science Development (CSD) or Medical Research Council (MRC), who are seconded to UCT yes yes yes 25%   Staff of the University of the Western Cape yes no yes 25%   Members of the University Council no no yes 75%   Permanent staff of SHAWCO yes yes yes 25%   Permanent staff of HESA yes yes yes 25%   Permanent teaching staff of SACS. The rate may only be applied to full-time study for a total of four years (recoverable annually subject to passing) no no yes 75%   Permanent staff of the University of Stellenbosch who are professional staff of the libraries or who teach librarianship, and who are undertaking masters or doctoral studies in library and information science at UCT yes no no 75%   5. Pensioners, widows and widowers   Category of staff Self Dependant on a full-time course Rate (% of full fee charged)   spouse/ partner children   Pensioners who served as permanent UCT / joint / tripartite staff members yes yes yes 25%   Widows and widowers of deceased staff members and pensioners who served as permanent UCT/ joint/ tripartite staff members yes yes yes 25%   6. Special cases   Special cases may be approved by the Vice-Chancellor on their merits, and the percentage rate will be at the Vice-Chancellor's discretion.     Procedure   The staff member must complete the application form (HR125) providing both student and staff particulars.The University Council has determined that students who qualify for both the staff tuition rate and an entrance or faculty scholarship, will have their scholarship adjusted pro-rata to the staff tuition rate percentage. The adjustment will be processed after the staff tuition rate has been processed by the Fees Office.  The following documentation must be attached to the form. For application on behalf of a child:   certified copies of the child's birth certificate and ID. for children over the age of 25, details and proof of the child's income and financial dependence.   For application on behalf of an adopted child   certified copies of the adopted child's birth certificate and ID proof of adoption for adopted children over the age of 25, details and proof of the child's income and financial dependence   In the case of part-time staff, the number of hours worked per week must be shown, and in the case of joint/tripartite staff on WCG conditions of service, the period of appointment must be shown. The HoD must confirm the staff member's relationship with UCT by signing the form. Completed application forms together with the relevant documentation must be sent to the HR Practitioner who services the faculty or PASS department. Should a person resign from the position or terminate the condition which entitled him/her to a staff tuition rate during the current year, he/she must inform the Human Resources Department. The period to which the staff rate is applicable will be reduced and the fees amended through adjustment to the fee account.   Payment of the staff tuition rate on behalf of the staff member by the University  All UCT staff eligible for the UCT staff tuition rate, must pay the UCT staff tuition rate. Due to tax consequences, these amounts cannot be reimbursed from UCT funds. This includes journals processed between funds for the UCT staff tuition rate.  In terms of the Finance Reimbursement Policy (FM005), the Executive Directors of Finance and HR must authorise all exceptions on the motivation of the HOD. This will only be considered if this development is an explicit requirement of the position, and full motivation is provided.  Additionally, in terms of the Staff learning and development funding policy:   the course must be for a sustained period of time; and the course must be examined or formally assessed; and the course must be done through a recognised, reputable institution; and the course must be position-related, not developmental; and the course must be approved by the line manager; and support and funding for the course has been agreed with the Executive Director or Dean.   The successful applicant will be required to sign a bursary agreement before payment is processed.  Application form  HR125 - Tuition fee rates form.  Page last updated: 26 October 2018    Share on