6.1. Eligibility

6.1.1. Permanent and T2 staff, employed for more than 4 days per week, are entitled to 5 days family responsibility leave per year from the anniversary date of the current employment contract.

6.1.2. Staff on T1 contracts are entitled to 3 days family responsibility leave per year, as provided for in section 27 of the Basic Conditions of Employment Act 75 of 1997.

6.1.3. Ad hoc and paid-on-claim staff are not entitled to family responsibility leave.

6.1.4. Family responsibility leave expires each year on the anniversary date.

6.2. Definition

6.2.1. Family responsibility leave may be granted where:

an immediate family member is ill and in need of medical attention from a registered medical practitioner, and where the staff member is required to take care of the ill person; or

upon the death of an immediate family member.

6.2.2. In the case of 6.2.1 above immediate family members include spouse, life partner, parent, adoptive parent, parent-in-law, grandparent, child, adoptive child, grandchild and sibling.

6.2.3. The decision to grant leave rests with the Head of Department provided that the staff member has family responsibility leave due to him or her and operational requirements allow for it.

6.3. Application for family responsibility leave

6.3.1. Application for family responsibility leave must be made in advance if possible, using form HR140. The leave can be taken from the total allocation as a block of consecutive days or in any other combination.

6.3.2. A staff member who is absent from work owing to a family responsibility must immediately inform his or her Head of Department or line manager of the reason for the absence.

6.3.3. Family responsibility leave in the case of illness is granted subject to the provision of a medical certificate for days 3, 4 or 5 of the entitlement (for T1 staff a medical certificate is required for day 3 of the entitlement), which explains the use of this leave to look after an ill immediate family member. A medical certificate is not required for days 1 and 2 of the entitlement.

6.3.4. Family responsibility leave in the case of death, is granted subject to the staff member providing a death certificate for any day of the entitlement.

6.4. Additional days

6.4.1. A staff member needing to look after a seriously ill immediate family member beyond the allotted days, may apply to take annual leave or, if necessary, unpaid leave.