4.1. Legal definitions

4.1.1. Ill-health incapacity is the failure or inability of a staff member to work according to the requirements of the position as a result of ill-health (including mental ill-health) or injury. In the case of incapacity for reasons of ill-health or injury, no fault can be attributed to the staff member, and is not the same as poor performance incapacity.

4.1.2. Incapacity due to ill health or injury is assessed relative to the requirements of the position. It can be a partial, temporary, short-term, long-term, or permanent condition and is managed accordingly. See also: Disability through ill health.

4.1.3. Sick leave is provided for in cases of temporary, short-term incapacity for reasons of ill health or injury as per 4.1.1.

4.1.4. Sick leave is not provided if a staff member is fit to work.

4.2. Accruals: Permanent PASS and academic staff

4.2.1. A staff member may be granted sick leave on full pay for a total of not more than 30 calendar days during the first year of service, for a total of not more than 60 calendar days during the first two years of service, and for a total of not more than 90 calendar days during the first three years of service.

4.2.2. A person who has completed at least three years of service may, in each cycle of six years from the date of appointment, be granted sick leave for a total of 180 calendar days of which not more than 90 shall be on full pay and the remainder on half pay.

Summary: A permanent staff member earns 30 calendar days full pay sick leave per annum on the anniversary date for the first 3 years of the 6 year cycle. He or she earns 30 calendar days half pay sick leave per annum for years 4 to 6 of the 6 year cycle. In total this will be 90 calendar days full pay and 90 calendar days half pay over 6 years. In the second and subsequent cycles, all sick leave accrues in advance.

4.3. Accruals: PASS and academic staff on T1/T2 contracts

4.3.1. In line with the Basic Conditions of Employment Act, 1 day per month worked is accrued as sick leave.

4.3.2. Only sick leave which has accrued to date may be taken.

4.4. Accruals: Ad hoc and paid-on-claim staff

4.4.1. In line with the Basic Conditions of Employment Act, leave accrues at the rate of 1 day paid sick leave per 26 days worked. This will be prorated according to the number of hours worked.

4.4.2. Only sick leave which has accrued to date may be taken.

4.5. Application for sick leave

4.5.1. If a staff member becomes unable to perform in his or her position due to ill health or injury (see Section 4.1 Legal definitions) during the course of the working day, at whatever time, and is given leave to go home by his or her line manager, a full day’s sick leave must be taken.

4.5.2. All staff members must produce a medical certificate from a registered medical practitioner in respect of any sick leave for periods of more than two days. At the discretion of the Head of Department, a medical certificate may be required for all periods of sick leave especially where there is a pattern or suspicion of abuse.

4.5.3. The diagnosis indicated on the certificate need not be fully disclosed but must be within the expected competencies and permitted practices for the licensed individual who is issuing it. The certificate must clearly state that the person is unfit for work (see Section 4.1 Legal definitions) and give the dates for which he or she is booked off.

4.5.4. A staff member who is absent from work owing to injury or illness must immediately make every effort to inform his or her head of department or line manager of the reason for the absence and he or she must continue to do so daily until a medical certificate, which specifies the period of sick leave, has been provided. This practice applies to any day which is not covered by a sick leave certificate.

4.5.5. On returning to work, the sick leave taken must be reported using form HR140.

4.6. When sick leave runs out

4.6.1. The following measures may be possible in exceptional circumstances when sick leave runs out, with a written motivation and HOD/line manager’s support:

sick leave may be taken as unpaid and/or;

available half pay sick leave may be converted to full pay sick leave and/or;

annual leave may be recorded as sick leave at the rate of 1 day’s annual leave for 1 day’s sick leave if annual leave is available.

4.6.2. Final approval for the above measures lies with the Executive Director: Human Resources and will not, as a general rule, be granted unless:

a medical certificate has been provided; and

the period of absence on sick leave is longer than 14 days; and

the absence on sick leave was the result of serious illness or injury, other than that for which a claim has been approved under Workmen’s Compensation Assistance (WCA); and/or failure to do so would lead to a staff member experiencing extraordinary financial hardship.

4.7. Return to work and light duty

4.7.1. There shall be reasonable accommodation for a staff member affected by an injury or illness-related condition following a period of sick leave. Partial incapacity is normally a temporary condition and is managed accordingly (see Section 4.1 for a definition of incapacity).

4.7.2. If light duty has been requested, it must be supported with a certificate from a registered medical practitioner.

4.7.3. Light duty, if operationally possible, will be determined by the line manager and Human Resources in consultation with the medical practitioner.

4.7.4. Where it is not possible to accommodate light duty, and full, long-term or permanent incapacity is determined, the staff member may be able to access the Income Continuation and Rehabilitation benefit. See: Disability through ill health.