7.1. Eligibility

7.1.1. Permanent PASS and academic staff, and staff on T2 contracts, are eligible for special leave.

7.1.2. Staff on T1 contracts are eligible for special leave with rights and pay on UCT business, but not for any other type of special leave.

7.1.3. Ad hoc and paid-on-claim staff, are not eligible for special leave.

7.2. Absences on University business (special leave with rights and pay)

7.2.1. Special leave with rights and pay is granted when a staff member is to be away from UCT on University business, for example when attending a conference or undertaking field work for periods of up to 15 working days. For academic staff, periods in excess of 15 working days are normally taken as contact leave. In rare cases, motivations for special leave with pay for continuous periods in excess of 15 working days will require the approval of the Deputy Vice-Chancellor responsible for academic staff or the Executive Director: Human Resources for PASS staff.

7.2.2. The staff member continues to be paid his or her normal salary and to enjoy his or her normal staff benefits. Leave accrues during special leave with pay.

7.3. Absences when summonsed for a court appearance (special leave with rights and pay)

7.3.1. Special leave may be applied for where a staff member has been subpoenaed to appear in court as a witness. Proof in the form of a court notice to appear as well as proof of attendance is required. Note: Appearances in court for traffic or other motor vehicle violations, as a party in a lawsuit or as a spectator are annual leave.

7.4. Absences to participate in sporting events (special leave with rights and pay)

7.4.1. Staff wishing to be absent from the University in order to participate in sport, whether at international or other level, must use their annual leave in the first instance and thereafter apply for special leave. All categories of sport are considered and each application is considered on its merits.

7.5. Absences on professional business (special leave without pay but with rights)

7.5.1. Special leave without pay but with rights is granted when a staff member is away from UCT on business that is not UCT business but is related to his or her discipline or profession. For example this would be granted to a staff member taking up a short term appointment at another university, after which he or she would return to normal duties at UCT.

7.5.2. The staff member is not paid during this period.

7.5.3. Membership of the UCT Retirement Fund or the Associated Institutions Pension Fund continues for this period. The University meets only part of its normal contribution (up to 22.5% of the staff member’s retirement-funding income), but the staff member must make prior arrangements to meet any further contributions to the fund that may be required.

7.5.4. Group Life cover continues for this period, as part of the 22.5% mentioned above. Where the staff member has optional multiple cover, he or she must make prior arrangements to meet these contributions.

7.5.5. The staff member is required to retain medical aid cover during this period and must make prior arrangements to meet the full cost of this cover.

7.5.6. No leave of any kind accrues during this period.

7.6. Absences on personal business (special leave without pay and without rights)

7.6.1. Special leave without pay and without rights is granted when a staff member is away from UCT on personal business.

7.6.2. The staff member is not paid during this period.

7.6.3. Members of the UCTRF during the absence:

must contribute risk and admin cost (Payroll Office will advise the percentage during consultation) or;

may contribute 22.5% (risk cover and retirement funding).

7.6.4. While on leave without pay and without rights, a staff member will have to make arrangements to meet the cost of his/her choice above.

7.6.5. Where the period of leave is 120 days or less, members of the Associated Institutions Pension Fund must retain their membership and the University will pay its contributions. Members of the UCT Retirement Fund may elect to make retirement funding contributions during such periods entirely at their own cost. However staff are obliged, whatever they elect to do, to pay the full cost of risk and death benefits.

7.6.6. Group Life cover continues for the period, but entirely at the cost of the staff member. In the case of UCTRF members the Group Life cost is part of the full cost of risk and death benefits.

7.6.7. The staff member is required to retain medical aid cover and must make prior arrangements to meet the full cost of this cover.

7.6.8. No leave of any kind accrues during this period.